========
Overview
========

High Dynamic Range Histogram pure python implementation

This repository contains a port to python of portions of the HDR Histogram
library:

- Basic histogram value recorging
    - record value
    - record value with correction for coordinated omission
- Supports 16-bit, 32-bit and 64-bit counters
- All histogram basic query APIs
    - get value at percentile
    - get total count
    - get min value, max value, mean, standard deviation
- All iterators are implemented: all values, recorded, percentile, linear, logarithmic
- Text file histogram log writer and log reader
- Histogram encoding and decoding (HdrHistogram V1 format only, V0 not supported)

Histogram V1 format encoding inter-operability with Java and C versions verified through unit test code.

Python API
----------
Users of this library can generally play 2 roles (often both):

- histogram provisioning (record values)
- histogram query

A histogram instance can be created using the HdrHistogram class and specifying the
minimum and maximum trackable value and the number of precision digits.
For example to create a histogram that can count values in the [1..3600000] range and
1% precision (this could be for example to track latencies in the range [1 msec..1 hour]):

.. code::

     histogram = HdrHistogram(1, 60 * 60 * 1000, 2)

Once created it is easy to add values to it:

.. code::

     histogram.record_value(latency)

If the code that generates the values is subject to Coordinated Omission,
use the corrected version of that method (example when the expected interval is
10 msec):

.. code::

     histogram.record_corrcted_value(latency, 10)

At any time, the histogram can be queried to return any property, such as getting
the total number of values recorded or the value at a given percentile:

.. code::

     count = histogram.get_total_count()
     value = histogram.get_value_at_percentile(99.9)

Recorded values can be iterated over using the recorded iterator:

.. code::

    for item in histogram.get_recorded_iterator():
        print('value=%f count=%d percentile=%f' %
                item.count_added_in_this_iter_step,
                item.value_iterated_to,
                item.percentile)


An encoded/compressed histogram can be generated by calling the compress method:

.. code::

     encoded_histogram = histogram.encode()

And on reception, a compressed histogram can be decoded from the encoded string:

.. code::

     decoded_histogram = HdrHistogram.decode(encoded_histogram)
     count = decoded_histogram.get_total_count()

In the case of aggregation, the decode_and_add method can be used:

.. code::

     aggregation_histogram.decode_and_add(encoded_histogram)

For additional help on how to use the API:

- browse through the python code and check the API documentation in the comment section for each method (where available)
- the best documentation is by looking at the test code under the test directory

The test code (https://github.com/ahothan/hdrhistogram/blob/master/test/test_hdrhistogram.py) pretty much covers every API.

Acknowledgements
----------------

The python code was directly ported from the original HDR Histogram Java and C libraries:

* https://github.com/HdrHistogram/HdrHistogram.git
* https://github.com/HdrHistogram/HdrHistogram_c.git


Installation
------------
Pre-requisites:

Make sure you have python 2.7 and pip installed

Binary installation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
This is the preferred method for most installations where you only need to use this library.

.. code::

    pip install hdrhistogram

Source code installation and Unit Testing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This is the method to use for any development work with this library or if you want to run the test code.

Install the unit test automation harness tox and hdrhistogram from github

.. code::

    pip install tox
    # cd to the proper location to clone the repository
    git clone https://github.com/ahothan/hdrhistogram.git
    cd hdrhistogram

Running tox will execute 2 targets:

- flake8 for syntax and indentation checking
- the python unit test code

Just run tox without any argument (the first run will take more time as tox will setup the execution environment and download the necessary packages):

.. code::

    $ tox
    GLOB sdist-make: /openstack/pyhdr/hdrhistogram/setup.py
    py27 inst-nodeps: /openstack/pyhdr/hdrhistogram/.tox/dist/hdrhistogram-0.1.0.zip
    py27 installed: flake8==2.4.1,hdrhistogram==0.1.0,mccabe==0.3.1,pep8==1.5.7,py==1.4.30,pyflakes==0.8.1,pytest==2.7.2,wsgiref==0.1.2
    py27 runtests: PYTHONHASHSEED='40561919'
    py27 runtests: commands[0] | py.test -q -s --basetemp=/openstack/pyhdr/hdrhistogram/.tox/py27/tmp
    
    ............................
    28 passed in 6.40 seconds
    
    pep8 inst-nodeps: /openstack/pyhdr/hdrhistogram/.tox/dist/hdrhistogram-0.1.0.zip
    pep8 installed: flake8==2.4.1,hdr-histogram==0.1,hdrhistogram==0.1.0,mccabe==0.3.1,pep8==1.5.7,py==1.4.30,pyflakes==0.8.1,pytest==2.7.2,wsgiref==0.1.2
    pep8 runtests: PYTHONHASHSEED='40561919'
    pep8 runtests: commands[0] | flake8 hdrh test
    ________________________________________________________________________ summary _________________________________________________________________________
      py27: commands succeeded
      pep8: commands succeeded
      congratulations :)
    $

Performance
-----------
Although not nearly as fast as the Java and C version, the python version provides
adequate performance for most uses considering it is pure python code.
Histogram value recording has the same cost characteristics than the Java version since it is a direct port (fixed cost for CPU and reduced memory usage).
Encoding and decoding is relatively fast thanks to the use of native compression library (using zlib).

Aggregation of Distributed Histograms
-------------------------------------

Aggregation of multiple histograms into 1 is useful in cases where tools
that generate these individual histograms have to run in a distributed way in
order to scale sufficiently.
As an example, the wrk2 tool (https://github.com/giltene/wrk2.git) is a great
tool for measuring the latency of HTTP requests with a large number of
connections. Although this tool can support thousands of connections per
process, some setups require massive scale in the order of hundreds of
thousands of connections which require running a large number of instances of
wrk processes, possibly on a large number of servers.
Given that each instance of wrk can generate a separate histogram, assessing
the scale of the entire system requires aggregating all these histograms
into 1 in a way that does not impact the accuracy of the results.
So there are 2 problems to solve:

- find a way to properly aggregate multiple histograms without losing any detail

- find a way to transport all these histograms into a central place

This library provides a solution for the aggregation part of the problem:

- reuse the HDR histogram compression format version 1 to encode and compress a complete histogram that can be sent over the wire to the aggregator

- provide python APIs to easily and efficiently:

    - compress an histogram instance into a transportable string
    - decompress a compressed histogram and add it to an existing histogram

Refer to the unit test code (test/test_hdrhistogram.py) to see how these APIs can be used.

Limitations and Caveats
-----------------------

The latest features and bug fixes of the original HDR histogram library may not be available in this python port.
List of notable features/APIs not implemented:

- concurrency support (AtomicHistogram, ConcurrentHistogram...)
- DoubleHistogram
- histogram auto-resize
- recorder function

Dependencies
------------
The only dependency (outside of using pytest and tox for the unit testing) is the
small pbr python package which takes care of the versioning (among other things).

Licensing
---------

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.

Contribution
------------
External contribution and forks are welcome.

Changes can be contributed back using preferably GerritHub (https://review.gerrithub.io/#/q/project:ahothan/hdrhistogram)

GitHub pull requests can also be considered.


Links
-----

* Source: https://github.com/ahothan/hdrhistogram.git

